# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Global Dietary Database
#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: PDDL-1.0

Global Dietary Database Terms of Use

Source: https://globaldietarydatabase.org/terms-and-conditions-use

To ensure wide dissemination of its information, the GDD is committed to making
its content freely available and encourages the use, reproduction and
dissemination of the text and data presented. All content on the GDD website
(except where otherwise indicated, and subject to any third party restrictions
that may be indicated), may be copied, printed and downloaded for private study,
research and teaching purposes, and for use in non-commercial products or
services, provided that appropriate acknowledgement of GDD (or the applicable
third party owner) as the source is given and that GDD's (or the applicable
third party owner's) endorsement of users' views, products or services is not
stated or implied in any way.

Downloading Datasets

By downloading the datasets, you agree to comply with the GDD terms of use,
including the requirement to comply with all applicable laws, comply with the
terms of use of the data owners identified in each data set, not reproduce,
share, or further disseminate the original data sets to others, and not use the
data for commercial purposes without written permission from Tufts.

Publication and Dissemination

You agree this data will only be used for private study, research and teaching
purposes, and for use in non-commercial products or services, provided that
appropriate acknowledgement of GDD as the source is given and that GDD's
endorsement of users' views, products or services is not stated or implied in
any way. Under no circumstances shall the data sets be used for commercial
purposes or offered for sale in any way.

Acknowledgement

Provide proper attribution to the GDD and Tufts University, and the data owners
(if applicable) as the data source, and name the data set that you have used.
Whenever data is used, there needs to be a specific sentence, as a footnote,
stating that data was provided by GDD (in association with the data owners, if
applicable). Any publication should name the source. The following format is to
be used when providing attribution:

[Global Dietary Database] [Title of content] [Location on GDD website] [Date
accessed and/or downloaded]

Reproduction or Sharing of Data Sets

Data sets owned by the GDD that you may download from this website are for your
own individual and internal non-commercial use, and are not for resharing or
further dissemination to third parties. Under no circumstances may you sell the
data sets or derivative works of the data sets. Some data sets provided on this
website have been shared by Tufts courtesy of third party data owners, which are
identified in each data set. If you wish to redistribute or reuse data that has
been provided by a third party data owner, it is your responsibility to obtain
permission from the data owner.
